# Algebra

## chapter 2 Groups

### Basic definitions

**Group** : group is a set of elements with a law of composition and they should satisfy the following properties:

- the law of composition should be associative

- $G$ has an identity element $1$ , such that $1a = a1 =a$ for all $a \in G$ 
- every element $a \in G$ has an inverse that is $b \in G$, such that $ab = 1$

*abelian group* : is a group whose law of composition is commutative.

---

property of composition law :

<details><summary>associative</summary> a(bc) = (ab)c, in Chinese is called 结合律.</details>

<details><summary>commutative</summary>ab = ba, in Chinese is called 交换律.</details>

---

**Cancellation law**
For $a,b,c \in G$, if we have $ab = ac$ or $ba = ca$, then we have $b = c$; And if we have $ab =a$ or $ba =a$, then we have $b = 1$.

**subgroup** is a subset $H$ of group $G$ which has the same composition law as $G$ and satisfy the following three properties:

- *Closure* : if $a, b \in H$, $ab \in H$.
- *Identity* : $1 \in H$
- *Inverses* : if $a \in H$, then $a^{-1} \in H$.

---

### Some examples of subgroup

We will see some subgroups of $\mathbb{Z}^{+}$, which is all the integers under the addition operation group. 

##### 1. $\mathbb{Z}a$

$$
\mathbb{Z}a = \{ n \in \mathbb{Z} \vert n = ka\ for\ some\ k \in \mathbb{Z}\}
$$

This is the set of all integers which are divisible by $a$. And notice that for all non-trivial subgroup of $\mathbb{Z}^{+}$, we have a non-zero $a$ such that this subgroup is equal to $\mathbb{Z}a$.

##### 2. $\mathbb{Z}a + \mathbb{Z}b$

$$
\mathbb{Z}a +\mathbb{Z}b = \{n \in \mathbb{Z} \vert n = sa +tb \ for\ some\ s,t \in \mathbb{Z}\}
$$

If we let $d = \gcd (a,b)$, then $\mathbb{Z}a + \mathbb{Z}b = \mathbb{Z}d$.

##### 3. $\mathbb{Z}a  \cap \mathbb{Z}b$

If we let $m =  lcm (a,b)$, then $\mathbb{Z}m = \mathbb{Z}a \cap \mathbb{Z}b$.

---

### Cyclic Groups

This is an important sort of abstract subgroup, the *cyclic subgroup* generated by an arbitrary element $x \in G$. It is the smallest subgroup of $G$ contains $x$, which is $\{\cdots, x^{-2}, x^{-1}, 1, x, x^{2}, \cdots\}$. 

If we have $x^{k} = 1$, then we call the generated group $\langle x\rangle = \{1, x, \cdots, x^{k-1}\}$ *cyclic group of order $k$*

If there is no such $k$, we call this subgroup infinite order. 

And we call a subgroup of group $G$ generated by a subset $U$, if it is the smallest subgroup of $G$ that contains $U$ and all elements that can be generated by multiplying a list of elements of $U$ and their inverse.

And also we can find a subset $U$ that generate the group $G$ then we will say $U$ generates group $G$.

We can see that the permutation group $S_{3}$ is generated by ${}$ $\{x,y\}$.

Here are two other examples in the book, can check there.

---

### Homomorphism

**Homomorphism** is a structure-keeping map between two groups. 

##### Definition

A homomorphism is $\varphi : G \rightarrow G'$ such that for every $a,b \in G$ we have $\varphi(ab) = \varphi(a)\varphi(b)$.

This definition means that this map keep the composition law of the two groups in some sense. 

Then here are two important sets are defined they are image of $\varphi$ and kernel of $\varphi$.

image of homomorphism is just the same definition as the image of map.

kernel of a homomorphism $\varphi : G \rightarrow G'$ is a subset of $G$, whose image is $1 \in G'$. So the kernel of homomorphism has some properties. Here we need a definition called coset to describe the properties.

**coset** : $aH = \{g \in G|g = ah\ for\ some\ h\in H \}$ is called a *left coset* of $H$ in $G$. 

Then we can write the property like the following: 

For a homomorphism $\varphi: G \rightarrow G'$ the following things are equivalent:

1. $\varphi (a) = \varphi (b)$ 
2. $a^{-1}b$ is in $K$
3. $b$ is in the coset $aK$
4. the coset $aK$ and $bK$ is equal.

So it is obvious that the homomorphism is injective iff the kernel is trivial $\{1\}$.

**normal subgroup** : a subgroup $N$ is a normal subgroup of $G$ if for every $a\in N$ and every $g \in G$, $g a {g^{-1}} \in N$. And it is obvious kernel of homomorphism is a normal subgroup of group $G$.

*center* of a group is the set of elements that commute with all elements in $G$, that is $Z = \{z \in G|\forall x \in G, zx = xz\}$.

Then we want to discuss some kinds of homomorphism. The first one is isomorphism.

### isomorphism

isomorphism is a bijective map between two groups and keep the law of composition. **Then it is obvious that the inverse of isomorphism is also isomorphism.** 

When we talk about the *classifying groups*, we are talking about the isomorphic class of groups. It is very hard for us to classify all of groups. However, we can find a fact that when the order of the groups are prime number then these groups are cyclic. So prime number $p$ order groups are in one isomorphic class. 

Here is a strange point, when a isomorphism points the group $G$ to itself, then it is called **automorphism**. It is obvious the identity function is an automorphism, however there is another function which is called conjugate is also an automorphism.

A *conjugate* is defined by an element $g \in G$, for an element $a \in G$, its conjugation is $gag^{-1}$. This is a isomorphism to itself, because it has an inverse which is conjugation of $g^{-1}$. When the group is abelian, conjugation is the same as identity, well, they are not the same for non-commutative groups. 

The pair of elements $a,b$ in a group $G$ is commute iff $aba^{-1}b^{-1} = 1$.

### equivalence relations and partitions

a *partition* $\Pi$ of a set $S$ is a subdivision of $S$ into non-overlapping, non-empty subsets. And $S =$ union of disjoint subsets. 

An equivalence relation on a set $S$ is a relation between a pair of elements $a,b$. This kind of relation should satisfy the following 3 properties: 

1. transitive: $a \sim b$ and $b \sim c$, then $a \sim c$.
2. symmetric: $a \sim b$ then $b \sim a$.
3. reflexive: $\forall a, a \sim a$.

And we can find the congruent of triangular and the conjugacy are the equivalence relations.

Here is a important fact: An equivalence relations on a set $S$ determines a partition on the set $S$, and conversely. This can be proved by carefully checking the properties of partitions, all the elements are equivalent to $a$ contained in a subset $C_{a}$. These subsets constructs a partition of $S$.